Statemet of Purpose

While composing this personal statement, the words of Dr. Alejandro Moreno, a Venezuelan Ethnographer, came to mind: “My life became a question, the question became research, and the research turned into philosophical concern.” Implicitly, these words, describe a dialectical process between an individual and question-eliciting experiences during different temporalities. Similarly, the rationalities underlining my desire to pursue The Master in Sociology at The University of South Florida (USF), my scholarly interests, and future intentions emerged out of the interaction of my past experiences, present contingencies, and future projections during different seasons of my life.

While an ordained minister in Venezuela, I became interested in the social sciences as a tool for understanding social phenomena. For the first time, I pondered how culture and structure could influence people’s behavior; specifically, their effect on congregations’ attendance. Through a survey research, I found the institutional narratives were not in tune with youths’ expectative about their future. Simultaneously, the rhetoric of The Socialism of The 21st Century (a political ideology) was atracting members into government initiatives such as The Community Councils. These conclusions prompted congregations to create messages and programs more congruent with members’ quotidian experiences.

Excellence in ministry and academia earned me a scholarship to at The South American Seminary (SEMISUD in Ecuador). As a Theology student, I was exposed to Sociology as a tool for understanding social phenomena. Through Émile Durkheim, I reflected on the function of religion as an element of social cohesion and Max Weber and Talcott Parsons introduced me to debates on human action. However, it was the undertaking of Rodney Stark’s on the impact of social and demographic factors on the success of early Christians, in “The Rise of Christianity: A Sociologist Reconsiders History,” that showed me the explanatory power of Sociology.  

An excellent academic record allowed me to transfer to Asbury University. There, first, I intended to explore the interaction between structure, culture, and agency. Using theories from Social Psychology, I conducted the independent research “Self-Efficacy, Locus of Control, and Socioeconomic Status Among Venezuelans (from Valencia and The Capital) with Access to the Internet.” I learned that sampled individuals tended to have an external Locus of Control (LC), and those with an internal LC tended to have better education, income, and occupation than those with an external LC. This research was presented at The 2011 Kentucky Psychological Association Foundation, and earned me, along with academic merit (Dean's List 2008 - 2011), a place at The ASA Honors Program during The 2011 ASA Annual Conference. I graduated from Asbury with honors (overcoming the language barrier), as The 2011 recipient of The Outstanding Academic Achievement for a Senior Graduating in Sociology, and a member of The Phi Alpha Theta Honors Society.

After graduation, I started an enriching collaboration with the Institute of Economic and Social Research “Dr. Rodolfo Quintero” (IIES), at the Central University of Venezuela. This opportunity evolved from a Research Assistantship to a Research Fellowship and resulted in several publications and presentations (some of which I organized) nationally and internationally. In January of 2015, I came across the syllabus from Dr. Paul DiMaggio’s for a Sociology of Culture course. Following it as a reading guide, I acquainted myself with the connection between culture and cognition. Later, I expanded my readings including “Cognitive Sociology” by DiMaggio, Karen Cerulo’s “The Intersection of Culture and Mind,” and Omar Lizardo’s “Culture, Cognition and Embodiment.”

Out of the interaction of my past experiences, as an individual embedded in different relational-temporal structures (ministry, Seminary, and University) emerged a professional projection as a Sociologist capable of contributing significantly to the sociological knowledge (addressing questions in the interstices and frontiers of the discipline) through theoretically sophisticated and methodologically rigorous research. Furthermore, I expect to be able to engage a wider audience on how the dynamic between culture, structure, and cognition plays a critical role in many social problems. Finally, I learned through my interaction with professors such as Dr. Mauricio Phelan and Dr. Mike Cuckler, the crucial role that professors have on new scholars’ preparation; thus, I am passionate about participating in the formation of new generations of Sociologists. 

Currently, I am interested in how sociocultural factors and cognition interact (at different levels) resulting in the emergence, reproduction, and diffusion of culture (practices and knowledge). From this vantage points, I want to explore answers to interesting debates in substantive fields such as Social Networks, Social Psychology, Political Sociology, Social Movements & Transnationalism, Social Theory, and the Sociology of Technology & Society.

Preparing for graduate school, I am generating research ideas that could be developed into interesting thesis topics. In the context of scientific communities, I want to explore the dynamics of culture, structure, and cognition that affect the creation of collective frames and scientific knowledge. A focus on this meaning-making dynamic can iluminate how a framing processes influence the analysis and representation of information, concepts, and ideas emerging out machine-mediated activities, such as space exploration. Furthermore, I expect to understand how this constructivist dynamic affects the knowledge, practices, and collective frames that are used to promote enthusiasm for scientific endeavors from broader communities. In the context of transnational and political movements, I am interested in how transnational social movements and professional networks produce, reproduce, and diffuse collective frames, cultural repertoires, and practices aiming to shape people’s understandings of politics and economics. In this sense, an interesting empirical opportunity is to explore how the meaning-making dynamics of “Plan País,” a transnational network of professional Venezuelan emigrants, influence and legitimize political and economic ideas within the nation.

Similarly, I am interested in using theories from Microsociology, Social Theory, and Cognitive Science to model how culture, agency, and cognition interact, during times of instability, to produce structural and cultural changes. Under the umbrella of the IIES and using Mustafa Emirbayer’s and Ann Mische’s conceptualization of agency (in “What Is Agency?”); William H. Sewell’s notion of Structure (in “A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency, and Transformation”); along with Cognitive Sciences theories such as Ad Hoc Cognition, Hot and Cold Cognition, and mental time travel to explore the dialectical process through which Venezuelans’ structured-mental-schemas andtemporal-relational configurations interact activating the switching from an iterative-unconscious mental processes (in the sense of Giddens’s “Practical Consciousness” or Bourdieu’s “Habitus”) to a more reflective future-oriented mental process or “discursive consciousness.” Additionally, I hope to understand how the switch in cognitive style results in a re-work of mobility projects, impacting people’s intentions to migrate. 

Although, I have been able to accumulate significant research experience, reaching my potential as a social scientist (become a creative, productive, and influential social scientist) requires an intense and transformative graduate program that give me the theoretical and methodological tools I need to refine my scholarly interests and develop a strong foundation to continue doctoral studies in Sociology. I am exited to say that I found that program at The Master in Sociology at USF. 

My scholarly inclinations fit perfectly with the theoretical and methodological breadth and depth of The Department of Sociology at USF. Research interests and experiences prepared me to build collaborative relationships with scholars such as Robert Benford, Elizabeth Aranda, Stephen Turner, and John Skvoretz with whom I share an interest in Sociology of Culture and Knowledge, Social Theory, Cognitive Science, Social Networks, Social Movements, Political Sociology, Transnationalism, and Quantitative Methods. Second, resources such as activities oriented to engage with the community and research projects such as Immigrant Transnationalism and Modes of Incorporation are of particular interest for my development as an social scietist. 

I have come a long way from time I questioned the potential of Social Science to explain social phenomena in Venezuela and Ecuador. As a scholar that followed a non-traditional path, experiences and the contingencies developed the character, attitude, attributes, and skills that will accompany me as I pursue The Master in Sociology. My drive and tenacity can be noticed by several research experiences that I crafted my self: Actively searching a collaborative opportunity with IESS, and proposing and conducting the research “Central Kentucky Refugees' Challenges” as part of an internship with The United Way of The Bluegrass. Furthermore, these experiences have developed in me a multicultural perspective and leadership skills that make me an asset to the vibrant and diverse environment of The USF’s Sociology Program. In the last couple years, I have been involved in several activities with the community such as ESL Tutor and Mentor for refugees in the process of entering College with Kentucky Refugees Ministries, Consultant and Volunteer to La Alianza Community Council in  Carabobo (Venezuela) and Tutor for elementary students with The Fayette County Public Schools. Finally, curretly I am enrolled in a nine-course specilization on Data Sciecet in the online platform Coursera. 

Through my college education and research experience, I have cultivated the appropriate research knowledge, technical skills, and personal attributes (determination, perseverance, discipline, and initiative) necessary to undertake and complete graduate studies successfully. Therefore, I am eager to join The Master in Sociology at USF where excellence and passion for research are highly valued.

